Data collection guidance (#1061)
open-contracting/standard: docs/guidance/build.md

This phase is about creating a new IT system, or updating an existing IT system, to implement your [mapping](map) and publish OCDS data.

> Alternatively, if you don't have the capacity to create or update an IT system, you can consider reusing an existing [data collection tool](build/data_collection_tools). If you're reusing an existing tool, this phase is about customizing that tool to meet your needs and working out how to collate and publish your data.

Reviewer: Can we use a simpler word than collate (used again later)? Not a blocker, just a suggestion.

Reviewer: After reading all the content, the only sentence that clarifies this step of collation is: "If you collected your data using the data collection form or spreadsheet, the easiest option is to simply collate the data into a single spreadsheet for publication." Even then, I'm not sure what is involved (I guess it's more obvious after working with the spreadsheets?) Anyway, either omit or expand the content about collation, so that it's more easily understood.

Author: I've replaced 'collate' with 'combine' in https://github.com/open-contracting/standard/pull/1061/commits/1ad00bc849bc8c636c7dadeebe7f888a6252a824 and expanded the guidance. There are many approaches to combining spreadsheet data, so the guidance is necessarily generic.

```
**Resource:** [Technical case studies: OCDS implementation insights report](https://www.open-contracting.org/resources/technical-case-studies-ocds-implementation-insights/) provides insights into the technical choices made in OCDS implementations in Paraguay, Zambia, Colombia, Moldova and Argentina's Road Agency Vialidad.

> If you’re reusing an existing tool for collecting OCDS data, you should consider how you will collate and publish data collected using the tool. The [OCDS Helpdesk](../../support/#ocds-helpdesk) can help you to consider options for publication.

Reviewer: This repeats the earlier new paragraph, but it doesn't restore the context that the publish will not "create or update an IT system", so it's possible that an IT system-based publisher will misread this paragraph. The only new information this paragraph adds is to contact the helpdesk, so we can perhaps move that up and remove this paragraph.

Author: Done in https://github.com/open-contracting/standard/pull/1061/commits/1ad00bc849bc8c636c7dadeebe7f888a6252a824

```
**Resource:** [Technical case studies: OCDS implementation insights report](https://www.open-contracting.org/resources/technical-case-studies-ocds-implementation-insights/) provides insights into the technical choices made in OCDS implementations in Paraguay, Zambia, Colombia, Moldova and Argentina's Road Agency Vialidad.

### Decide how to combine spreadsheet data

If you aren't creating or updating an IT system, but are instead collecting data using multiple spreadsheets, then this step is about working out how to combine your data into a single file for publication. Combining your data makes it easier for users to analyze the whole dataset.

> If you plan to publish your data infrequently and you only have a small number of spreadsheets, then simply copy-pasting the data into a single file for publication may be the easiest method.

Reviewer: This assumes the headers are identical. Readers unfamiliar with tabular data either won't understand what it means to copy-paste the data into a single file, or will try to copy-paste data from files with different headers.

Reviewer: I'm also unclear how the process leads to there being multiple spreadshets.

Author: > I'm also unclear how the process leads to there being multiple spreadshets.

There would be multiple spreadsheets if different users/departments/ agencies fill-in offline spreadsheets and send them to a central point for reporting purposes.

We have seen this being done in at least Nigeria (before NOCOPO, each procuring entity filled out a spreadsheet and sent it to the Bureau of Public Procurement) and the Philippines (each procuring entity fills out a spreadsheet and sends it to the Government Procurement Policy Board) so it seems like a common pattern where there isn't a central IT system.

The MS Excel format version of the OCDS data collection spreadsheet is designed with this use case in mind.

How about:

```
If you aren't creating or updating an IT system, but are instead collecting data from different individuals, departments or agencies using spreadsheets, then this step is about working out how to combine your data into a single file for publication. Combining your data makes it easier for users to analyze the whole dataset.
```

> This assumes the headers are identical. Readers unfamiliar with tabular data either won't understand what it means to copy-paste the data into a single file, or will try to copy-paste data from files with different headers.

If the publisher is using a data collection spreadsheet I would expect the headers to be the same across all copies of the template, but happy to clarify if you think it's important. How about:

```
If you plan to publish your data infrequently, you only have a small number of spreadsheets and your spreadsheets have identical headers, then simply copy-pasting the data into a single file for publication may be the easiest method.
```

Reviewer: > There would be multiple spreadsheets if different users/departments/ agencies fill-in offline spreadsheets and send them to a central point for reporting purposes.

> We have seen this being done in at least Nigeria (before NOCOPO, each procuring entity filled out a spreadsheet and sent it to the Bureau of Public Procurement) and the Philippines (each procuring entity fills out a spreadsheet and sends it to the Government Procurement Policy Board) so it seems like a common pattern where there isn't a central IT system.

It would be good to have 1-2 sentences to describe this pattern somewhere in these docs, so that readers are clear on what spreadsheets are being combined.

Reviewer: > If you aren't creating or updating an IT system, but are instead collecting data from different individuals, departments or agencies using spreadsheets, then this step is about working out how to combine your data into a single file for publication. Combining your data makes it easier for users to analyze the whole dataset.

Yes, that satisfies my above comment.

Reviewer: > If you plan to publish your data infrequently, you only have a small number of spreadsheets and your spreadsheets have identical headers, then simply copy-pasting the data into a single file for publication may be the easiest method.

+1. In my experience, users frequently modify, add and remove headings without recognizing the impact.

Otherwise, you can consider the following methods:

> * If you're comfortable using the commandline, you can CSV Kit's [`in2csv` command](https://csvkit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/scripts/in2csv.html) to convert your files to CSV format and the [`csvstack` command](https://csvkit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/scripts/csvstack.html) to combine them into a single file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you're comfortable using a command-line interface, you can use CSV Kit's [`in2csv` command](https://csvkit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/scripts/in2csv.html) to convert each sheet of a spreadsheet into a CSV file, and then use the [`csvstack` command](https://csvkit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/scripts/csvstack.html) to combine sets of CSV files with identical headers into single CSV files.
```

> * If you're comfortable writing VBA or Google Apps Script code, you can write a macro script in your preferred spreadsheet package to combine your data into a single file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you're comfortable writing Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) or Google Apps Script code, you can write a macro for Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets to combine your data into a single file.
```

* If you intend to **publish [record packages](../../schema/record_package)**, [OCDS Merge](https://ocds-merge.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is the best software library for creating OCDS [records](../../getting_started/releases_and_records). If you use the [Python](https://www.python.org/) programming language, you can use it directly. If not, you can use its [test cases](https://ocds-merge.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#test-cases) to test your implementation of the [merge routine](../../schema/merging), and you can read its [commented code](https://github.com/open-contracting/ocds-merge) as inspiration for your implementation.
* If you have [release packages](../../schema/release_package) and want to have [record packages](../../schema/record_package), if you have data that follows an older version of OCDS, or if you otherwise need to transform your OCDS data, you can use [OCDS Kit](https://ocdskit.readthedocs.io/) as a command-line tool or [Python](https://www.python.org/) library.

> If you’re reusing an existing [data collection tool](build/data_collection_tools), you can customize it:

Reviewer: I think it's important to restore the context of "if you aren't creating or updating an IT system, but are instead …"

Author: Done in https://github.com/open-contracting/standard/pull/1061/commits/1ad00bc849bc8c636c7dadeebe7f888a6252a824
